Title: TypeIt!
<br>
Author: Tina Wu


---

## Why TypeIt!
When the time comes for me to decide what I want to do for my first unessay, I was torn between several ideas. I knew I wanted to do a programming related project because it's a topic I enjoy diving into and I want to use this opportunity to learn something new. I considered coding a website from scratch and perhaps write about some topics that really interested me throughout the semester so far. I thought about making a simple cryptography program that encrypts the input file and successfully decrypts it back. Then there's this Chrome Extension idea, to allow users to change external aspects of a webpage based on their preferences.

I finally decided on this TypeIt! project because I remember feeling so fascinated and intrigued during the discussion in class when everyone spoke about their favorite fonts and the reasoning behind them. I would never consider myself an artsy person, never had an eye for design, formatting, color palettes, etc. But when my classmates stumbled over trying to explain why they like a certain font, concluding to "it just feels right and easy for me to read", I understood. A huge part of design, specifically web design, ultimately lies in the user's experience. In the article [*"How Does Color Usage Affect Search Engine Optimization and Conversions"*](https://searchengineland.com/how-color-affects-search-engine-optimization-seo-138393), Shari Thurow discussed the importance of a user-centric interface and the effects of color contrasts on a webpage to the reader. I became even more intrigued to dive into this project to better readers' experiences.

I remember reading M.M. Backus's [*"Novel Writers and Publishers"*](http://www.merrycoz.org/books/PARLOR.xhtml) and struggling to stay focus and follow the lines. I remember reading other articles and websites and wished the font was different, wished the background color wasn't just plain white, and wished I could change something about the page. After the unit on Typecasting and reading Chris Gayomali's [*"How Typeface Influences the Way We Read and Think"*](http://theweek.com/articles/463196/how-typeface-influences-way-read-think), it really made me realize how much typography affects the reader.

## Struggles and Learning Curve
I was very nervous about this project and felt uncertain that I will be able to finish it. I've never built a Chrome Extension before so I wasn't sure how long it will take and how difficult the whole process will be. But then I remember Professor Cordell's encouragement that he'd rather us try and attempt something bold than to choose the easy option. So I began my research online on how to get this project started.

I felt intimidated. Everything felt so foreign. I started reading Google's [Developer's Guide](https://developer.chrome.com/extensions) and downloaded a few files as starter code. Trying to understand the code was extremely difficult because I've never done JavaScript coding before, and it reminded me of the time when I was learning French and how I only recognized a few words. I began to reflect a little bit about language and the importance of coherence. I understood some of the lines individually in JavaScript because of my proficiency in Java. Similarly, I recognized some vocabulary in French because of my proficiency in English. However, understanding the entire context requires more effort.

I started by learning the purpose of every function, jotting down comments and annotating the code. I was reading like a [Renaissance Reader](http://www.adamghooks.net/2012/08/how-to-read-like-renaissance-reader.html) - "To read and not to understand what we read, or not to know how to make use of it, is nothing else but a neglect of all good learning." It could not have been more suited in this context. If I didn't understand what the snippets of code does, how can I utilize the specific function to accomplish my objective? So I gathered up all my patience and began decoding the starter code.

## Instant Gratification
When I completed my analysis of the starter code, I began working towards my first goal - changing the background color. Of course, like a lot of programming, it requires googling and trial-and-error. But when the background color of that page smoothly changed to the color I selected, I cheered and did an inner fist bump in my head. This is the feeling that keeps me addicted to programming: the satisfaction and sense of achievement that resulted from solving problems and overcoming challenges. I was giddy and riding what my friends and I like to call the "coder's rush". I selected a lot of different background colors, some oohs and aahs when the colors were pretty and comfortable, but I frowned when the colors were sharp and hurt my eyes. I feel myself slowly entering the design zone.

With this baby step accomplished, I took the next step and started integrating font changes. This was definitely the most interesting part during the development. I looked at so many fonts and added the most popular and web-safe ones to the selection list. As always, I played around with all the different fonts and just sat there with a smile on my face while experiencing the different appeals the fonts exuded. The nerdy composer in me actually laughed because of how easy it is to click a different font in a dropdown menu compared to how laborious it is to remove all the type and re-compose with a different case in order to change the font.

I got into the rhythm of implementing new functionalities.
1. Add a section for the new functionality to popup.html so it shows when the user clicks on the extension
2. Add the components needed for the functionality to popup.html
    1. color chooser for changing background colors
    2. dropdown menu for changing fonts
3. Add the JavaScript function for the specific action in popup.js, and include the script needed to change aspects of the webpage
    1. script to change fontFamily for changing fonts
4. Add the JavaScript EventListener to popup.js so the program knows when the user has interacted with the extension (clicked a button, selected a dropdown menu item)

Like letterpress printing, it was a process all the same. When our type wasn't printing clearly on the letterpress machine, we adapt, problem-solve, and try again. When a functionality wasn't working the way it should, I analyze, debug, and try again.

## Shortcomings
As I start wrapping up this project, I am proud of myself. I am proud of the things I've learned and how my project turned out. However, there are some shortcomings I wish I was able to accomplish and some bugs that I wasn't able to solve.

I originally wanted to integrate the [Google Fonts API](https://fonts.google.com/) to provide a larger variance of fonts for the user to choose from. I had such a fun time browsing through the page, seeing all the fonts that exist out there, and admiring the grandeur. I thought about where I had seen the different fonts, how certain types of fonts are suited for different occasions, and the function and purpose the font serves. But integrating it turned out to be a lot harder to do compared to how it would've been done for a static webpage you're building (I did it for my personal website). Because the way Chrome Extensions work is we're injecting external JavaScript commands to the webpage, we're not actually changing the origin characteristics that the webpage was built with. Everything got so much more complicated. However, I do plan on successfully using the Google Fonts API in future releases and updates of this extension.

A bug I wasn't able to fix was that the font size changes and the font styles (bold and italics) aren't always applied to the webpages. After trying the extension on a variety of websites including static HTML pages, pages that run on bootstrap or other templates, and dynamic JavaScript and React pages, I think the problem lies in the built-in style constraints these pages have. Most of the online articles run on a specific template that bind all the webpages on that website to a certain style and design; this may prohibit external JavaScript commands to change the page. I was actually quite disappointed that my extension doesn't work on some webpages.

## Takeaways
Stepping back and reflecting on the entire experience of this project, I felt my perspective as a programmer shifted in terms of product development. There are two main takeaways I had after completing this project.

I learned that good design is more than the colors and the formatting. Good design also involves the audience, it involves context. First, design isn't just about having the right font but also the appropriate font size, a comfortable background accent, a suitable font color, line spacings, margins, and other aspects. It is having the right formula that puts all these features together that leads to a good design. It isn't just one thing, it's everything altogether. In addition, designing a webpage that is effective requires the designer to know the audience and the function of the text. A scholarly article is going to appear comic if it is published in purple fonts. If it is a children's book, the designer may consider using a bigger font size and larger line spacings.

I also learned that a successful product is one that is user-centric. Originally I had the popup be in Courier font because that was the font that I was most comfortable with, mainly due to the fact that I spend most of my time on the computer looking at monospace fonts. But further into the development process, the popup just looked weird and off, the appearance doesn't feel right. I want it to look more approachable, more friendly. I finally decided to throw away my pride as the developer and went for a more comfortable but still techy font - Ubuntu. The change was dramatic! Taking it a step further, I experimented with several different background colors such as pastel green, lavender, and light blue. The extension immediately felt more polished and modern. This also made me realize the importance of design, especially designing for the users of the product.

Overall, the unessay has been such a great experience for me to explore the crossroads of technology and media. I still feel fascinated everytime I'm able to connect something I learned in an English class to what I do on the tech side. I not only grew to become stronger programmer as a result of this project, learning a new language and experimenting with a brand new process of building a Chrome extension, I also grew to become a more curious scholar. I began to see programming in a more three-dimensional light and am excited to discover more about how code interacts with text in ways I don't know before.
